woman	WOMAN
a woman cooks pap	WOMAN PAP COOK
woman	WOMAN
man	MAN
the man is searching for a cow	MAN COW SEARCH
man	MAN
baby	BABY
the baby is crying because it is hungry	BABY CRYING WHY HUNGRY
baby	BABY
girl	GIRL
the girl is short and her hair is tied up	GIRL SHORT HAIR-TIED
girl	GIRL
boy	BOY
the boy wears a T-shirt	BOY WEAR SHIRT
boy	BOY
friend	FRIEND
Are you two friends?	YOU-TWO FRIEND?
friend	FRIEND
family	FAMILY
Where is your family's home?	FAMILY HOME WHERE?
mother	MOTHER
the mother ties her baby on her back and walks off	MOTHER BABY BACK-TIE  WALK-TOGETHER
mother	MOTHER
father	FATHER
The father has a big round tummy	FATHER  BIG-STOMACH
father	FATHER
sister	SISTER
My big sister and I are wearing the same clothes	SISTER ME WEAR SAME
sister	SISTER
brother	BROTHER
I love my tall brother	BROTHER TALL ME LOVE
brother	BROTHER
grandmother	MOTHER OLD
The grandmother looks after the small children	MOTHER OLD CHILDREN LOOK-AFTER
grandmother	MOTHER OLD
grandfather	FATHER OLD
grandfather sits with his hands on his stick	FATHER OLD HAND ON STICK
grandfather	FATHER OLD
aunt	AUNT
My mother and my aunt are going to the shop	MOTHER AUNT SHOP WALK-TOGETHER
aunt	AUNT
uncle	UNCLE
The uncle is a taxi driver	UNCLE TAXI DRIVER
uncle	UNCLE
name	NAME
What is your name?	NAME YOU WHAT?
name	NAME
short	SHORT
He is a short man	MAN HIM SHORT
short	SHORT
tall	TALL
Wow! You are tall!	WOW YOU TALL
rude	RUDE
Making faces like that is rude	FUNNY-FACE YOU RUDE
hearing	HEARING
Those two people over there are hearing	THERE PEOPLE TWO THEY HEARING
deaf	DEAF
I am deaf and you are hearing	ME DEAF YOU HEARING
hello	HELLO
Two people meet and say hello	PEOPLE MEET HELLO HELLO
please	PLEASE
Can you please fetch me that cup over there?	CUP THERE TO ME PLEASE
thank you	THANK YOU
This present is for me? Thank you	PRESENT ME THANK YOU
thank you	THANK YOU
sorry	SORRY
I broke the vase. I am sorry	VASE BROKE. ME SORRY
help	HELP
The man helps by carrying the boy	MAN THERE BOY THERE HELP HOW CARRY
help	HELP
run	RUN
The boy runs	BOY RUN
walk	WALK
Come on! You walk so slowly.	COME YOU WALK-SLOW
walk	WALK
laugh	LAUGH
The girl laughs at what she reads.	GIRL THEY READ LAUGH
stand	STAND
Father stands and waits for the taxi	FATHER STAND STAND STAND WHY TAXI ARRIVE
sick	SICK
The man is in bed because he is sick.	MAN SLEEP LIE WHY SICK
sleep	SLEEP
The moon is there. You must go to sleep.	MOON THERE YOU SLEEP NOW.
cry	CRY
My brother has gone so I cry.	ME CRY WHY BROTHER GONE
bath	BATH
After you have played all day, you bath at night.	ALL-DAY PLAY NIGHT BATH
want	WANT
I want that apple	APPLE THERE WANT
want	WANT
brush	BRUSH
Before you go to sleep, brush your teeth	SLEEP BEFORE BRUSH
brush	BRUSH
eat	EAT
All night I eat pap	ME ALL-NIGHT PAP EAT
eat	EAT
play	PLAY
The children play outside.	CHILDREN OUTSIDE PLAY
play	PLAY
stop	STOP
Stop fighting.	FIGHTING STOP.
stop	STOP
happy	HAPPY
I am happy because my uncle is visiting.	ME HAPPY WHY UNCLE ARRIVE
happy.	HAPPY.
sad.	SAD.
My father is sad because mother is gone.	FATHER THERE SAD WHY MOTHER GONE.
sad.	SAD.
sore.	SORE.
I am sick. My head is sore.	ME SICK HEAD SORE
sore.	SORE.
hungry	HUNGRY
I have not eaten all day. I am hungry.	ALL-DAY EAT NOTHING ME HUNGRY.
hungry.	HUNGRY.
thirsty.	THIRSTY.
It is hot and I am thirsty.	HOT ME THIRSTY.
thirsty.	THIRSTY.
angry.	ANGRY.
I am angry because that girl threw a stone at the dog.	GIRL THERE DOG STONE-THROW ME ANGRY.
angry.	ANGRY.
now.	NOW.
Come here now.	COME NOW COME.
come.	COME.
yesterday.	YESTERDAY.
Yesterday I tripped and fell.	YESTERDAY ME WALK FALL.
yesterday.	YESTERDAY.
today.	TODAY.
Today is Monday.	TODAY MONDAY.
Mother is going to work.	MOTHER WORK GONE.
today.	TODAY.
tomorrow.	TOMORROW.
Tomorrow you and I are going to visit grandmother.	TOMORROW MOTHER OLD YOU ME VISIT
tomorrow.	TOMORROW.
monday.	MONDAY.
monday.	Monday.
tuesday.	TUESDAY.
tuesday.	TUESDAY.
wednesday.	WEDNESDAY.
wednesday.	WEDNESDAY.
thursday.	THURSDAY
thursday.	THURSDAY.
friday.	FRIDAY.
friday.	FRIDAY.
saturday.	SATURDAY
saturday	SATURDAY
sunday.	SUNDAY.
sunday.	SUNDAY.
week.	WEEK.
Dad is coming home in two weeks.	TWO-WEEK FATHER HOME TWO.
week	WEEK.
month.	MONTH.
Next month I will by new clothes.	MONTH NEXT CLOTHES BUY NEW.
year.	YEAR.
My family has lived in that house for three years.	HOUSE FAMILY LIVE YEAR THREE.
year.	YEAR.
birthday.	BIRTHDAY.
Tomorrow it is my birthday.	TOMORROW BIRTHDAY ME.
oh I see.	oh-i-see
oh hi	oh hi
you will learn south african sign language	You learn south african sign language
a	a
b	b
c	c
d	d
e	e
f	f
g	g
h	h
i	i
j	j
k	k
k	k
l	l
m finger is placed here	m here
n	n
o	o
p is the same as k but down p	p k-down p
q	q
r	r
s	s
t	t
u	u
v	v
w	w
x	x
y	y
z	z
hello	hello
hello	hello
how are you?	how-are-you
how are you?	how-are-you
what is your name?	name you what
what is your name?	name you what
where do you live?	you live where
where do you live?	you live where
what work do you do?	you work what
what work do you do?	you work what
what are you studying?	you study what
what are you studying?	you study what
which university are you at?	university you study where
which university are you at?	university you study where
student	student
student	student
what	what
who	who
why	why
which	which
when	when
how	how
how much	how much
how much	how much
how many	how many
how many	how many
how long	how long
how long	how long
how old are you?	old you
how old are you	old you
or	or
no	no
no	no
yes	yes
yes	yes
but	but
have	have
same	same
different	different
because	because
again	again
after	after
before	before
do you understand?	you understand
i do not understand	me misunderstand
please	please
thank you	thank-you
sorry	sorry
question	question
i know	know
i remember	remember
i forgot	forgot
can i go now?	now go yes
can i go now?	now go yes
bye bye	bye
it was nice to meet you	nice meet-you
it was nice to meet you	nice meet-you
deaf	deaf
hearing	hearing
learn	learn
learn	learn
like	like
like	like
love	love
meaning	mean
meet	meet
meet	meet
sign slow please	sign slow please
sign slow please	sign slow please
facilitator	facilitator
lecture	lecture
lecturer	lecture person
tutorial	tutorial
tutor	tutorial person
hello welcome	hello welcome
we want to interview you today because you studied sign language at UCT	today interview why before you learn sign language where U-C-T
how are you?	how-are-you
I am well thank you. How are you?	I-am-good thank-you you how-are-you?
I am good, thank you	i-am-good thank-you
now for the interview. I would love to hear all about your experiences.	now interview why you tell-me-about your experience
how did you learn sign language?	sign language you learn how
i started studying at UCT in 2014	i start university cape-town 20-14
in first year I studied linguistics	first year study what linguistics
we recieved an email saying that there are two deaf students who want to teach sign language	we-recieved-email say what two deaf students want have teach sign language
I thought, ok, i'll join the class and I started to learn with Robyn and Yuvini	i think O-K join class and learn learn with Roobyn Yuvini
interesting. Why did you learn sign language?	interesting sign language learn why
When I started learning it was because it was something new. I wanted to be an interpreter but not for sign language, for italian and arabic. So spoken language things.	when start learn why i thing new.
I wanted to be an interpreter but not for sign language, for italian and arabic.	want interpret but sign language no want interpret for i-t-a-l-i-a-n italian a-r-a-b-i-c arabic.
So spoken language things.	hearing translation things
But when i started learning sign language, wow, my mind opened.	but when start learn sign language wow my-mind-opened.
I learnt that there are many applications for sign language.	learnt many applications for sign language.
Now I want to change my language to interpret to sign language and help the Deaf community in the same way the Deaf community helped me.	now interpreter change help deaf community way deaf community help-me
do you have any advice to give to other hearing people who want to learn sign language?	think advice-give other hearing people learn sign language have
good advice to give hearing people who are starting to learn sign language.	good advice hearing people start learn sign language.
wow.	wow.
many things to say	many
The most important thing to learn is to listen with your eyes and not your ears.	say most important need learn how recieve eyes not ears.
Because sign language is all visual.	because sign language all visual.
If you try to lip read it will not help you,you need to focus on the person's hands and look how they sign and what the signs mean. You will learn faster.	if recieve lip-reading will-not help-you need sign-watch how sign mean learn fast. also need conversation deaf person easy learn.
Also you also need to converse with a deaf person quickly because it's easier to learn.	also need conversation deaf person easy learn.
what are your thoughts on sign language deprivation	sign language deprivation your thoughts what
yes it is a big problem.	yes big problem.
yes it is a big problem, specifically in south africa because people do not understand the importance of giving a child sign language	specifically south africa why people do-not-understand important sign language give deaf child.
the child grows up open minded which allows them to intergrate into the world	the-child grows-up open-minded grammar intergrate can world perfectly
without language, a deaf child will not understand grammar and meaning and therefore be isolated by society- people will try to communicate but because of language deprivation there is limited language input.	without deaf children growing-up grammer-will-not-understand meaning-will-not-understand isolated society because people deaf try communicate but grow-up language deprivation have-no language input.
growing up with lost communication, you are alone and isolated.	growing-up communication-lost time alone isolated
do you consider yourself as part of the deaf community	consider deaf community you apart
hmm, yes	hmm yes
I think the question is complicated.	i-think question complicated
I am a hearing person which means that my being a member of the deaf community....	me person hearing topic within member deaf community
the inner circle of the deaf community no	deaf community inside circle inside no
but the outer circle of the deaf community yes	but outer circle deaf community yes
the inner circle consists of people who are born deaf- the close deaf commmunity	born deaf circle in centre close deaf community
but if you are hearing and you know sign language you are part of the outer circle.	but if hearing know sign language outer-circle yes
the inner circle of the deaf community are people who are deaf obviously	inner-circle deaf community but topic deaf obviously
I think i am a member of the deaf community also because i am training to be a sign language interpreter.	for-me i-think yes-member deaf community also why interpreter change
but the inner circle, am I deaf? no.	but inner deaf no
what is your most embarrassing moment learning sign language	you learn sign language up-until-now happen one embarrassing what
Once we went to a restuarant with robyn, yuvini, our friend chris, robyn's dad and myself	one time go restuarant robyn yuvini friend chris robyn dad myself
All five of us sat at the table in the restuarant and chris said that he is vegetarian.	all-five sat-at-table restuarant chris say vegetarian
Yuvini asked what the difference is between vegetarian and vegan is	yuvini ask vegetarian v-e-g-a-n different what
i explained saying that vegetarians can eat pets	i explain say well vegetarian can eat pets
this is pets. I meant to say animal products	this-pets pets mean animal products
I see robyn drinking and then she puts her hand over her mouth because she wants to spit but she needs to swallow it.	see drinking hand-over-mouth need spit swallow
Her dad is sitting opposite and she will spit on him	because dad opposite spit on him
wow that was an embarrassing moment	wow embarrassing wow
Any challenges?	challenges
challenges wow	challenges wow
I started living with robyn and yuvini and we were living together for one to two weeks.	start live robyn yuvini short one two weeks
We went to go see a play about wheelchair users and the challenges they face on a faily basis.	go see play about wheelchair challenges people wheelchair see all daily
After the show there was music and dancing but the interpreter said "oh, you do not need me to interpret the songs, bye" and walked away.	music after when dancing wheelchair dancing but interpreter say oh need me interpret songs no bye walked-away
the interpreter was gone	mean interpreter gone
I sat with robyn and yuvini interpreting the songs for myself because I was not a qualified interpreter	i sit robyn yuvini interpret songs for-myself because not-qualified interpreter
I felt a tap on my shoulder and there was a deaf man who said "please go interpret, please go interpret"	tap-on-my-shoulder i-look-up deaf man say please go interpret please go interpret
I cannot interpret- I have not started my training to be an interpreter and I only just started living with Deaf people	me cannot interpret training not-start just-staying deaf people
he said "please go, it's better than nothing"	please go better nothing
I though- okay, it's better than nothing so walked to the stage and sat there interpreting the songs	o-k better nothing i-walk sit stage start interpreting songs
thank god i knew the songs before but it was still difficult because i needed to sign quickly and keep up	thank god know songs before but difficult fast need sign quickly sign-to-keep-up
For me it was a good challenge because i was forced to interpret because I wanted to help my friends.	but for-me good challenge because i-went forced there interpret need interpret because help friends mine.
for me it was a good challenge	for-me good good challenge
Interesting your experiences are interesting.	interesting. your experience you-signed-to-me wow
I am sure our viewers enjoyed watching.	I sure viewers watch enjoy
thank you	thank you
next week we will focus on the following vocabulary: relationships, UCT, numbers and time.	next week focus what vocabulary first relationships second U-C-T third numbers fouth time.
Plus I am excited to interview Jabaar.	plus excited interview who Jabaar.
See you all next week.	see-you next week.
I love you	I-love-you
